OSDOCS-13968: add rhel worker node removal info (#91677)
openshift/openshift-docs: updating/preparing_for_updates/updating-cluster-prepare-past-4.18.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="updating-cluster-prepare-past-4.18"]
= Preparing to update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: updating-cluster-prepare-past-4.18

toc::[]

> Before you update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version, learn about some of the specific concerns around {op-system-base} compute machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version, learn about some of the specific concerns around {op-system-base-full} compute machines.
```
Since this is the first instance of the product name on the page, we need to spell it out.

> Learn about some of the specific concerns around {op-system-base} compute machines before attempting to update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version, learn about some of the specific concerns around {op-system-base} compute machines.
```
Just a tweak to lead with the second person ("you") to engage the reader.

[id="migrating-workloads-to-different-nodes_{context}"]
== Migrating workloads off of package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes

> With the introduction of {product-title} 4.19, package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes are no longer supported. Attempting to update your cluster while having these nodes up and running will prevent you from successfully completing the update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the introduction of {product-title} 4.19, package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes are no longer supported. If you try to update your cluster while those nodes are up and running, the update will fail.
```
Not sure if "the update will fail" is too harsh. Feel free to take or ignore this suggestion.

You can reschedule pods running on {op-system-base} compute nodes to run on your {op-system} nodes instead by using node selectors.

For example, the following `Node` object has a label for its operating system information, in this case {op-system}:

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

.Sample `Node` object with {op-system} label
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
kind: Node
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: ip-10-0-131-14.ec2.internal
  selfLink: /api/v1/nodes/ip-10-0-131-14.ec2.internal
  uid: 7bc2580a-8b8e-11e9-8e01-021ab4174c74
  resourceVersion: '478704'
  creationTimestamp: '2019-06-10T14:46:08Z'
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/os: linux
    failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone: us-east-1a
    node.openshift.io/os_version: '{product-version}'
    node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ''
    failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region: us-east-1
    node.openshift.io/os_id: rhcos <1>
    beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type: m4.large
    kubernetes.io/hostname: ip-10-0-131-14
    beta.kubernetes.io/arch: amd64
#...
----

> <1> The label identifying the OS running on the node, to match the pod node selector.

Reviewer: Looks like we're supposed to spell out "operating system" according to the SSG: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#operating-system

```suggestion
<1> The label identifying the operating system that runs on the node, to match the pod node selector.
```

> Any pods that you want to schedule to new {op-system} nodes must contain a matching label in its `nodeSelector` field. The following procedure describes how to add it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any pods that you want to schedule to new {op-system} nodes must contain a matching label in its `nodeSelector` field. The following procedure describes how to add the label.
```

.Procedure

> . Deschedule the {op-system-base} node currently running your existing pods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Deschedule the {op-system-base} node currently running your existing pods by entering the following command:
```
See https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#procedure-step-that-introduces-a-command

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc adm cordon <rhel-node>
----

. Add an `rhcos` node selector to a pod:

> ** To add the node selector to existing and future pods, add the node selector to the controller object for the pods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** To add the node selector to existing and future pods, add the node selector to the controller object for the pods by entering the following command:
```

+
.Example `Deployment` object with `rhcos` label
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch dc <my-app> -p '{"spec":{"template":{"spec":{"nodeSelector":{"node.openshift.io/os_id":"rhcos"}}}}}'
----
+

> Any existing pods under your `Deployment` controlling object will be recreated on your {op-system} nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any existing pods under your `Deployment` controlling object will be re-created on your {op-system} nodes.
```
ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#recreate

** To add the node selector to a specific, new pod, add the selector to the `Pod` object directly:
+
.Example `Pod` object with `rhcos` label
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: <my-app>
#...
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    node.openshift.io/os_id: rhcos
#...
----
+
The new pod will be created on {op-system} nodes, assuming the pod also has a controlling object.

[id="identifying-and-removing-rhel-worker-nodes_{context}"]
== Identifying and removing {op-system-base} worker nodes

> With the introduction of {product-title} 4.19, package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes are no longer supported. The following procedure describes how to identify {op-system-base} nodes for cluster removal on bare-metal installations. You must perform the steps described in this procedure in order to ensure a successful cluster update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the introduction of {product-title} 4.19, package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes are no longer supported. The following procedure describes how to identify {op-system-base} nodes for cluster removal on bare-metal installations. You must complete the following steps to successfully update your cluster.
```
ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#perform

.Procedure

> . Identify nodes in your cluster that are running {op-system-base} by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Identify nodes in your cluster that are running {op-system-base} by entering the following command:
```
Maybe use "entering" here to avoid having two instances of "running" near each other.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get -l node.openshift.io/os_id=rhel
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
NAME                        STATUS    ROLES     AGE       VERSION
rhel-node1.example.com      Ready     worker    7h        v1.21.0
rhel-node2.example.com      Ready     worker    7h        v1.21.0

> rhel-node3.example.com      Ready     worker    7h        v1.21.0

Reviewer 2: Not very important, but the k8s version in 4.18 should be 1.31, such as for the latest 4.18.10, the VERSION is `v1.31.7`

Author: thank you. fixed

----

> . xref:../../nodes/nodes/nodes-nodes-working.adoc#nodes-nodes-working-deleting-bare-metal_nodes-nodes-working[Continue with the node removal process]. {op-system-base} nodes are not managed by the Machine API and have no compute machine sets associated with them. You must unschedule and drain the node before manually deleting it from the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. xref:../../nodes/nodes/nodes-nodes-working.adoc#nodes-nodes-working-deleting-bare-metal_nodes-nodes-working[Continue with the node removal process]. {op-system-base} nodes are not managed by the Machine API and have no compute machine sets associated with them. You must unschedule and drain the node before you manually delete it from the cluster.
```

> 

Reviewer: Should the "For more information..." line be indented under step 2?

Author: good point! updated

> For more information on this process, see the following link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4976801[Red{nbsp}Hat Knowledgebase solution].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on this process, see link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4976801[How to remove a worker node from Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform 4 UPI?].
```
SSG: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#rh-kb-links

> For more information on this process, see link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4976801[How to remove a worker node from Red{nbsp}Hat {product-title} 4 UPI?].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on this process, see link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4976801[How to remove a worker node from Red{nbsp}Hat {product-title} 4 UPI?]
```
In the preview, it looked a little odd to have a period right after the question mark. I know the question mark is technically part of the title, but I think it might make sense to remove the period. WDYT?

Author: i agree with you, it looks strange. i'm down with omitting the question mark 😄

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="updating-cluster-prepare-past-4.18"]
= Preparing to update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: updating-cluster-prepare-past-4.18

toc::[]

Learn about some of the specific concerns around {op-system-base} compute machines before attempting to update from {product-title} 4.18 to a newer version.

[id="migrating-workloads-to-different-nodes_{context}"]

> == Migrating workloads to different nodes

Reviewer 3: Can we include something like "package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes" in this header somehow to make the scoping more obvious?  I'm hoping for some way for folks who know they only have RHCOS nodes to know they can skip this section.

Author: totally

You can reschedule pods running on {op-system-base} compute nodes to run on your {op-system} nodes instead by using node selectors.

For example, the following `Node` object has a label for its operating system information, in this case {op-system}:

.Sample `Node` object with {op-system} label
+
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
kind: Node
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: ip-10-0-131-14.ec2.internal
  selfLink: /api/v1/nodes/ip-10-0-131-14.ec2.internal
  uid: 7bc2580a-8b8e-11e9-8e01-021ab4174c74
  resourceVersion: '478704'
  creationTimestamp: '2019-06-10T14:46:08Z'
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/os: linux
    failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone: us-east-1a
    node.openshift.io/os_version: '{product-version}'
    node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ''
    failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region: us-east-1
    node.openshift.io/os_id: rhcos <1>
    beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type: m4.large
    kubernetes.io/hostname: ip-10-0-131-14
    beta.kubernetes.io/arch: amd64
#...
----

> <1> The label identifying the OS running on the node, to match pode node selector.

Reviewer 3: nit: "pode" -> "Pod" or "pod"?

Any pods that you want to schedule to new {op-system} nodes must contain a matching label in its `nodeSelector` field. The following procedure describes how to add it.

.Procedure

. Deschedule the {op-system-base} node currently running your existing pods:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc adm cordon <rhel-node>
----

> . Add an `rhcos`  node selector to a pod:

Reviewer 3: nit: "`rhcos`  node" has a double-space:

```suggestion
. Add an `rhcos` node selector to a pod:
```

> ** To add the node selector to existing and future pods, add the node selextor to the controller object for hte pods:

Reviewer 3: nit: "selextor" and "hte" typos:

```suggestion
** To add the node selector to existing and future pods, add the node selector to the controller object for the pods:
```

+

> .Example `DeploymentConfig` object with `rhcos` label

Reviewer 3: nit: can we use Deployments in the example instead, because [DeploymentConfigs have been deprecated since 4.14][1], and it makes more sense to me to focus on the hopefully-more-popular types we're trying to nudge folks towards instead.

[1]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.14/html/release_notes/ocp-4-14-release-notes#ocp-4-14-deployment-config-deprecated

Author: yes, thank you

Author: @wking is there any difference in the patching for `Deployment` objects?

----
+
Any existing pods under your `DeploymentConfig` controlling object will be recreated on your {op-system} nodes.

** To add the node selector to a specific, new pod, add the selector to the `Pod` object directly:
+
.Example `Pod` object with `rhcos` label
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: <my-app>
#...
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    node.openshift.io/os_id: rhcos
#...
----
+
The new pod will be created on {op-system} nodes, assuming the pod also has a controlling object.

[id="identifying-and-removing-rhel-worker-nodes_{context}"]
== Identifying and removing {op-system-base} worker nodes

With the introduction of {product-title} 4.19, package-based {op-system-base} worker nodes are no longer supported. The following procedure describes how to identify {op-system-base} nodes for cluster removal on bare-metal installations. You must perform the steps described in this procedure in order to ensure a successful cluster update.

.Procedure

. Create a script that identifies nodes running {op-system-base} and removes them from the cluster that is similar to the following:
+
.`remove_nodes.sh`
[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

> RHEL_NODES=$(oc get nodes -o=json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.nodeInfo.osImage | startswith("Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS") | not)) | .metadata.name') <1>

Reviewer 3: Thinking about this some more, we have existing 4.18 docs for [Adding RHEL compute machines to an OpenShift Container Platform cluster][1] and [Adding more RHEL compute machines to an OpenShift Container Platform cluster][2].  But I don't see an existing section on _Removing RHEL compute machines from an OpenShift Container Platform cluster_.  That seems like a section that might be worth growing, just for folks who are scaling up and down in response to load on 4.18?  And then this update-specific section can link over there, and suggest that folks run that process on all the RHEL nodes that:

```console
$ oc get -l node.openshift.io/os_id=rhel nodes
```

lists, instead of having to inline detailed advice here?  Because I'm certainly not clear on the "how to safely remove a package-based RHEL Node" steps myself, and would feel more comfortable if those docs lived in a section maintained by folks closer to that process.

[1]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/adding-rhel-compute#rhel-compute-overview_adding-rhel-compute
[2]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/more-rhel-compute

> RHEL_NODES=$(oc get nodes -o=json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.nodeInfo.osImage | startswith("Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS") | not)) | .metadata.name') <1>

Author: that's a good idea, @mburke5678 wdyt?

> RHEL_NODES=$(oc get nodes -o=json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.nodeInfo.osImage | startswith("Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS") | not)) | .metadata.name') <1>

Author: sounds good, i'll go ahead and update this PR to reflect just the identification of RHEL workers on clusters, and leave it without a link for now

> RHEL_NODES=$(oc get nodes -o=json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.nodeInfo.osImage | startswith("Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS") | not)) | .metadata.name') <1>

Author: based on some feedback from Scott, i have linked to the deleting nodes off bare metal clusters, bc RHEL workers arent associated with machine sets, so they must deleted using this method

for node in $RHEL_NODES; do
  oc adm cordon $node <2>
  oc adm drain $node --force --delete-emptydir-data --ignore-daemonsets <3>
  oc delete node $node <4>
done
----
<1> Identifies all nodes running {op-system-base}.
<2> Marks the nodes as unschedulable.
<3> Drains all the pods on each node. This might fail if the node is already offline or otherwise unresponsive. Even if the node does not respond, it might still be running a workload that writes to shared storage. To avoid data corruption, power down the physical hardware beforehand.
<4> Deletes the nodes from the cluster.

. Removing {product-title} from a machine in the cluster requires destroying the operating system, and you must decommision and wipe data from the hardware you have dedicated for any {op-system-base} machines in your cluster. To do this, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# nohup shred -n 25 -f -z /dev/<HDD>
----
+
Consider performing this step from RescueCD.

For more information on this process, see the following link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4976801[Red{nbsp}Hat Knowledgebase solution].

[id="provision-new-rhcos-nodes_{context}"]
== Provisioning new {op-system} worker nodes

> If you need additional compute nodes for your workloads, you can provision new ones either before or after you update your cluster. For installer-provisioned infrastructure installations, automatic scaling adds {op-system} nodes by default. For user-provisioned infrastructure installations on bare-metal platforms, you can manually xref:../../postinstallation_configuration/node-tasks.adoc#post-install-config-adding-fcos-compute[add {op-system} compute nodes to your cluster].

Reviewer 3: > For installer-provisioned infrastructure installations, automatic scaling adds {op-system} nodes by default.

I don't think clusters come with autoscaling enabled out of the box.  And the install-time infrastructure choices are likely correlated to the current configuration, but don't always have to match.  Can we just link folks to [the _Machine management_ section][1]?  It has subsections for [manually scaling MachineSets][2], [autoscaling MachineSets][3], and [adding user-provisioned machines][4].

[1]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/index
[2]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/manually-scaling-machineset
[3]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/applying-autoscaling
[4]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/machine_management/managing-user-provisioned-infrastructure-manually#upi-adding-compute-aws
